Add a `/-/healthy` endpoint for monitoring component health (#2197)
grafana/alloy: docs/sources/reference/http/_index.md

Reviewer: Love it that we have this file now!

---
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/http/
description: Learn about HTTP endpoints exposed by Grafana Alloy
title: HTTP endpoints
weight: 700
---

> # The {{% param "FULL_PRODUCT_NAME" %}} HTTP endpoints

Reviewer 2: We still need to match up the H1 and the `title:` metadata. So we either drop `The` from the H1 or add it to the `title:` metadata.

There are HTTP endpoints which are enabled by default on every instance of {{% param "FULL_PRODUCT_NAME" %}}, 

> regardless which components are configured.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we could drop the always (which implies the availability never changes) and and just say `available by default` ?  I've updated the suggestion.  Does this work?

They can be used for monitoring, health checking, and troubleshooting.

The HTTP server which exposes them is configured via the [http block](../config-blocks/http)
and the `--server.` [command line arguments](../cli/run).
For example, if the `--server.http.listen-addr` command line argument is set to `127.0.0.1:12345`, 
you can query the `127.0.0.1:12345/metrics` endpoint to see the internal metrics of {{% param "FULL_PRODUCT_NAME" %}}.

### /metrics

Displays the internal metrics of {{% param "FULL_PRODUCT_NAME" %}} in the Prometheus exposition format.

### /-/ready

A {{% param "FULL_PRODUCT_NAME" %}} instance is "ready" once it has loaded its initial configuration.
If it is ready, HTTP 200 and the message `Alloy is ready.` are returned.
Otherwise, HTTP 503 and the message `Alloy is not ready.` are returned.

### /-/healthy

If all components are healthy, HTTP 200 and the message "Alloy is healthy." will be returned.
Otherwise, {{% param "FULL_PRODUCT_NAME" %}} will return HTTP 500 and an error message.

> You can also monitor component health through the [UI](../../troubleshoot/debug#alloy-ui).

Author: The error message varies, so I'd rather not be too specific.

```
$ curl localhost:12345/-/healthy

> Alloy is healthy.

Reviewer: Nit: should we say "All Alloy components are healthy."?

Author: Yes, I think this is more clear. I changed it just now, thanks!

```

```
$ curl localhost:12345/-/healthy
unhealthy components: math.add
```

### /-/reload

> Reloads the {{% param "FULL_PRODUCT_NAME" %}} configuration file. Returns HTTP 400 and an error message if an issue with the reload was encountered.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `/-/reload` endpoint reloads the {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} configuration file.
If the configuration file can't be reloaded, the `/-/reload` endpoint returns `HTTP 400 Bad Request` and an error message.
```

Is it the same error message or a different error message (depending on the reason the reload failed). Can we be more explicit here?

> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```shell
````

$ curl localhost:12345/-/reload
config reloaded
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```shell
````

$ curl localhost:12345/-/reload
error during the initial load: /Users/user1/Desktop/git.alloy:13:1: Failed to build component: loading custom component controller: custom component config not found in the registry, namespace: "math", componentName: "add"
```

### /-/support

> Generates a [support bundle](../../troubleshoot/support_bundle).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `/-/support` endpoint returns a [support bundle](../../troubleshoot/support_bundle) that contains information about your {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} instance. You can use this information as a baseline when debugging an issue.
```

### /debug/pprof

> Generates a [profile](../../troubleshoot/profile).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `debug/pprof` endpoint returns a pprof Go [profile](../../troubleshoot/profile) that you can use to visualize and analyse profiling data.

```

---
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/http/
description: Learn about HTTP endpoints exposed by Grafana Alloy

> title: Grafana Alloy HTTP endpoints

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: The Grafana Alloy HTTP endpoints
```

We need the `The` to align with the H1 title.  Or we drop the `The` off the H1

If all components are healthy, the `/-/healthy` endpoint returns `HTTP 200 OK` and the message `All Alloy components are healthy.`.
Otherwise, if any of the components are not working correctly, the `/-/healthy` endpoint returns `HTTP 500 Internal Server Error` and an error message.
You can also monitor component health through the {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} [UI](../../troubleshoot/debug#alloy-ui).

```shell
$ curl localhost:12345/-/healthy
All Alloy components are healthy.
```

```shell
$ curl localhost:12345/-/healthy
unhealthy components: math.add
```

{{< admonition type="note" >}}
The `/-/healthy` endpoint is not suitable for a [Kubernetes liveness probe][k8s-liveness].

An Alloy instance which reports as unhealthy should not necessarily be restarted.
For example, a component may be unhealthy due to invalid configuration or due to an unavailable external resource.
In this case, restarting {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} would not fix the problem.
A restart may even make it worse, because it would could stop the flow of telemetry in healthy pipelines.

[k8s-liveness]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/liveness-readiness-startup-probes/

> {{< /admonition >}}

Author: @clayton-cornell are you happy with this note?
Also, thanks to @rfratto for emphasising this!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{< admonition type="note" >}}
The `/-/healthy` endpoint isn't suitable for a [Kubernetes liveness probe][k8s-liveness].

An {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} instance that reports as unhealthy should not necessarily be restarted.
For example, a component may be unhealthy due to an invalid configuration or an unavailable external resource.
In this case, restarting {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} would not fix the problem.
A restart may make it worse, because it would could stop the flow of telemetry in healthy pipelines.

[k8s-liveness]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/liveness-readiness-startup-probes/
{{< /admonition >}}
```

Some minor tweaking and I think it's OK. The point is clear.
